RESUMABLE: Redefine Upload-Complete on the server side (#3404)
httpwg/http-extensions: draft-ietf-httpbis-resumable-upload.md

### Completeness {#upload-complete}

An upload is incomplete until it is explicitly marked as completed by the client or the server. After this point, no more representation data can be appended.

The `Upload-Complete` request and response header field conveys the completeness state. `Upload-Complete` is an Item Structured Header Field ({{STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}). Its value is a Boolean ({{Section 3.3.6 of STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}) and indicates whether the upload is complete or not. Other values MUST cause the entire header field to be ignored.

> An upload is marked as completed either when a request for creating the upload resource ({{upload-creation}}) or appending to it ({{upload-appending}}) included the `Upload-Complete` header field with a true value and the request content was fully processed, or when the server sends a response included the `Upload-Complete` header field with a true value, whichever happens first.

Reviewer: Some nits here:

- Fixed grammar error (two verbs in the same clause, "sends" and "included")
- Fixed inconsistent phrasing ("the server sends" vs. no "the client sends")
- Fixed inconsistent present vs. past tense ("is marked" vs. "included")
- "whichever happens first" at the end feels out of place grammatically and makes this sentence feel like a run-on. Is it necessary to include at all, since we're already saying either of them marks the upload as completed?

```suggestion
An upload is marked as completed either when a request for creating the upload resource ({{upload-creation}}) or appending to it ({{upload-appending}}) includes the `Upload-Complete` header field with a true value and the request content was fully processed, or when a response includes the `Upload-Complete` header field with a true value.
```

### Completeness {#upload-complete}

> An upload is incomplete until it is explicitly marked as completed by the client or the server. After this point, no representation data can be appended anymore.

Reviewer 2: nit: old text but maybe worth it while touch this
```suggestion
An upload is incomplete until it is explicitly marked as completed by the client or the server. After this point, no more representation data can be appended.
```

> The `Upload-Complete` request header field conveys the completeness state. `Upload-Complete` is an Item Structured Header Field ({{STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}). Its value is a Boolean ({{Section 3.3.6 of STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}) and indicates whether the upload is complete or not. Other values MUST cause the entire header field to be ignored.

Reviewer 2: I don't like this change, sorry. 

Per the HTTP style guidance, when defining the field we need to state it precisely. That's why we say "request and response header field" and then add more details in the followind sentences.

Upload-Complete is always a header field that can be used in requests or responses. When talking about a usage in a specific message we can state that without having to refer to is as "upload complete <request/response> field"

Author: What about now?

An upload is marked as completed if a request for creating the upload resource ({{upload-creation}}) or appending to it ({{upload-appending}}) included the `Upload-Complete` header field with a true value and the request content was fully processed.

> The `Upload-Complete` response header field signals whether the response comes from the initial targeted resource. The value of true means that the semantics of the targeted resource apply, and the value of false means that the semantics of the resumable upload protocol apply. It is worth noting that `Upload-Complete` can be true even when the full representation data was not transmitted in the case that the server decides to generate an early response when processing the targeted resource. The client SHOULD NOT perform upload resumption to the upload resource after receiving a response with the `Upload-Complete` field value set to true.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When used in a response, `Upload-Complete` signals whether the response comes from the initial targeted resource. The value of true means that the semantics of the targeted resource apply, and the value of false means that the semantics of the resumable upload protocol apply. It is worth noting that `Upload-Complete` can be true even when the full representation data was not transmitted in the case that the server decides to generate an early response when processing the targeted resource. The client SHOULD NOT perform upload resumption to the upload resource after receiving a response with the `Upload-Complete` field value set to true.
```

> An upload is incomplete until it is explicitly marked as completed by the client. After this point, no representation data can be appended anymore.

Reviewer 3: I think we need adjustments here as well. This sentence indicates to me that only the client can mark an upload as complete, which isn't the case anymore. 

```suggestion
An upload is incomplete until it is explicitly marked as completed by the client or the server. After this point, no representation data can be appended anymore.
```

The `Upload-Complete` request header field conveys the completeness state. `Upload-Complete` is an Item Structured Header Field ({{STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}). Its value is a Boolean ({{Section 3.3.6 of STRUCTURED-FIELDS}}) and indicates whether the upload is complete or not. Other values MUST cause the entire header field to be ignored.

An upload is marked as completed if a request for creating the upload resource ({{upload-creation}}) or appending to it ({{upload-appending}}) included the `Upload-Complete` header field with a true value and the request content was fully processed.

> The `Upload-Complete` response header field distinguishes the response from the initial targeted resource or the temporary upload resource. The value of true means the response is from the the initial targeted resource, and the value of false means the response is from the temporary upload resource. It is worth noting that `Upload-Complete` can be true even if the upload is not complete if the targeted resource decides to generate an early response.

Reviewer: > It is worth noting that `Upload-Complete` can be true even if the upload is not complete

This is confusing, especially since arguably `Upload-Complete` being true _defines_ the notion that the upload was completed in some sense. How about this (also fixed a typo, "the the"):

```suggestion
The `Upload-Complete` response header field distinguishes the response from the initial targeted resource or the temporary upload resource. The value of true means the response is from the initial targeted resource, and the value of false means the response is from the temporary upload resource. It is worth noting that `Upload-Complete` can be true even when the full representation data was not received if the targeted resource decides to generate an early response.
```

> The `Upload-Complete` response header field distinguishes the response from the initial targeted resource or the temporary upload resource. The value of true means the response is from the initial targeted resource, and the value of false means the response is from the temporary upload resource. It is worth noting that `Upload-Complete` can be true even when the full representation data was not received if the targeted resource decides to generate an early response.

Reviewer: As per the above discussion, I think we can improve this. At the very least, the response should be described as responding to a particular request rather than from a particular resource, because the response semantics also depend on the request method, headers, and content, not just the resource. Furthermore, it doesn't make sense to say the response is from the upload resource for the very first `Upload-Complete: ?0` response, since the client doesn't even know about the upload resource at that point.

Regardless, I think we can be even clearer than that--something irks me about simply asserting the response is responding to something that it actually isn't. It's ambiguous, as is apparent from @smatsson's arguments above. I think we can probably find a way to define this in a way that follows typical HTTP semantics, where a response is directly related to the corresponding request sent by the client.

I'm not experienced enough with RFC 9110 to confidently phrase this well, but can we say something like the following? Please completely rephrase if so; this phrasing is not good at all.

> The value of false means the response is related to the request that immediately prompted it, as usual. The value of true means the response must follow the semantics a response to the initial upload creation request would follow had that request omitted the `Upload-Complete` header and transferred the representation data up to what has already been transferred by prior upload creation and upload append requests for the current upload.

> The `Upload-Complete` response header field signals whether the response comes from the initial targeted resource. The value of true means that the semantics of the targeted resource apply, and the value of false means that the semantics of the resumable upload protocol apply. It is worth noting that `Upload-Complete` can be true even when the full representation data was not transmitted in the case that the server decides to generate an early response when processing the targeted resource. The client SHOULD NOT perform upload resumption to the upload resource after receiving a response with the `Upload-Complete` field value set to true.

Reviewer 3: Should we mention the possibility of an early response in the sections for PATCH and/or HEAD as well?

Author: I added `Upload-Complete` back as a SHOULD but realized that it was removed earlier in draft 10. Does the change make sense?

> The `Upload-Complete` response header field signals whether the response comes from the initial targeted resource. The value of true means that the semantics of the targeted resource apply, and the value of false means that the semantics of the resumable upload protocol apply. It is worth noting that `Upload-Complete` can be true even when the full representation data was not transmitted in the case that the server decides decides to generate an early response when processing the targeted resource. The client SHOULD NOT perform upload resumption to the upload resource after receiving a response with the `Upload-Complete` field value set to true.

Reviewer: Fixed typo.

```suggestion
The `Upload-Complete` response header field signals whether the response comes from the initial targeted resource. The value of true means that the semantics of the targeted resource apply, and the value of false means that the semantics of the resumable upload protocol apply. It is worth noting that `Upload-Complete` can be true even when the full representation data was not transmitted in the case that the server decides to generate an early response when processing the targeted resource. The client SHOULD NOT perform upload resumption to the upload resource after receiving a response with the `Upload-Complete` field value set to true.
```

> The `Upload-Complete` response header field distinguishes the response from the initial targeted resource or the temporary upload resource. The value of true means the response is from the initial targeted resource, and that the semantics of the targeted resource apply; the value of false means the response is from the temporary upload resource, and the semantics of the resumable upload protocol apply. It is worth noting that `Upload-Complete` can be true even when the full representation data was not received if the targeted resource decides to generate an early response. The client SHOULD NOT perform upload resumption to the upload resource after receiving a response with the `Upload-Complete` field value set to true.

Reviewer: Nit: "that" wasn't used in the same place for the value of false, so let's be consistent for the value of true's phrasing.

```suggestion
The `Upload-Complete` response header field distinguishes the response from the initial targeted resource or the temporary upload resource. The value of true means the response is from the initial targeted resource, and the semantics of the targeted resource apply; the value of false means the response is from the temporary upload resource, and the semantics of the resumable upload protocol apply. It is worth noting that `Upload-Complete` can be true even when the full representation data was not received if the targeted resource decides to generate an early response. The client SHOULD NOT perform upload resumption to the upload resource after receiving a response with the `Upload-Complete` field value set to true.
```

An upload is marked as completed either when a request for creating the upload resource ({{upload-creation}}) or appending to it ({{upload-appending}}) includes the `Upload-Complete` header field with a true value and the request content was fully processed, or when a response includes the `Upload-Complete` header field with a true value.

> When used in an upload creation response ({{upload-creation}}) or an upload append response ({{upload-appending}}), `Upload-Complete` signals whether the response comes from the initial targeted resource. The value of true means that the semantics of the targeted resource apply, and the value of false means that the semantics of the resumable upload protocol apply. It is worth noting that `Upload-Complete` can be true even when the full representation data was not transmitted in the case that the server decides to generate an early response when processing the targeted resource. The client SHOULD NOT perform upload resumption to the upload resource after receiving a response with the `Upload-Complete` field value set to true. The `Upload-Complete` response header field can also be false if an invalid operation is performed on a completed upload.

Reviewer: This is good, thanks! Only thing is that last sentence may make it sound like this is adding an exception case onto the definition, rather than clarifying a natural consequence of it. How about this:

```suggestion
When used in an upload creation response ({{upload-creation}}) or an upload append response ({{upload-appending}}), `Upload-Complete` signals whether the response comes from the initial targeted resource. The value of true means that the semantics of the targeted resource apply, and the value of false means that the semantics of the resumable upload protocol apply. The client SHOULD NOT perform upload resumption to the upload resource after receiving a response with the `Upload-Complete` field value set to true. Note that `Upload-Complete` can be true even when the full representation data was not transmitted in the case that the server decides to generate an early response when processing the targeted resource. Also note that `Upload-Complete` can be false in response to an invalid operation performed on a completed upload.
```

I also rearranged the sentences so both supplementary notes are next to each other at the end. Let me know if the phrasing is off at all.

HTTP/1.1 500 Internal Server Error
~~~

> D) The following example shows an upload creation being rejected by the server because uploads to the targeted resource are not allowed. The Upload-Complete header in the response is set to true since the server is uninterested in receiving the full representation and the upload is complete in its perspective. The client cannot continue the upload.

Reviewer 3: I'm unsure this is a good example for an early response. A 4XX response usually marks the end of an upload regardless of the presence of the `Upload-Complete: ?1` header. IMO the value of early responses isn't visible in error responses, but actually successful responses. Could we have an example where the early response is 2XX because the targeted resource already received all the representation it needed to generate a response?

Reviewer: I personally think an early 2XX response in the wild would be extremely rare. Supporting error responses that interrupt an upload is probably going to be the most common use case for early responses, and there's no reason an example couldn't reflect that well. Though I agree this in particular is not the best example of that, since the error response here is the very first response, so in a sense, it's not really "interrupting" the upload, just preventing it from starting in the first place.

Author: Yes, the most common cases for early responses are failures (401 unauthorized for example), and it's usually at the very beginning of the request. I think this example is fine for showcasing that Upload-Complete can be false in the request but true in the response. Or do we want an edge case example showing a particular pattern?

Reviewer 3: > the most common cases for early responses are failures (401 unauthorized for example)

In my mental model, these authentication failures would be raised before an upload resource is even allocated. But this might be different depending on your implementation.

One example for an early error response that's slightly different is when a content-encoded representation (e.g. Content-Encoding: gzip) is uploaded and a decoding failure occurs. If the resource receives invalid gzip data at some point, it can decide to end the upload with an early response because it cannot recover the decoded representation.

Author: I changed the example to corrupted gzip

Reviewer: I think, ideally, if the example is intended to demonstrate the significance of early responses, then the error should occur after the upload resource has been successfully created (even if that's less common), in response to an upload append.

Author: Add a 104 to the example

HTTP/1.1 500 Internal Server Error
~~~

> D) The following example shows an upload creation being rejected by the server because the request content cannot be decoded. The Upload-Complete header in the response is set to true since the server is uninterested in receiving the full representation after the decoding failure and the upload is complete in its perspective. The client cannot continue the upload.

Reviewer: Nit: fixed formatting.

```suggestion
D) The following example shows an upload creation being rejected by the server because the request content cannot be decoded. The `Upload-Complete` header in the response is set to true since the server is uninterested in receiving the full representation after the decoding failure and the upload is complete in its perspective. The client cannot continue the upload.
```

HTTP/1.1 500 Internal Server Error
~~~

> D) The following example shows an upload creation being rejected by the server because the request content cannot be decoded. The `Upload-Complete` header in the response is set to true since the server is uninterested in receiving the full representation after the decoding failure and the upload is complete in its perspective. The client cannot continue the upload.

Reviewer: Nit: fixed minor grammar error (missing comma between complete sentences).

```suggestion
D) The following example shows an upload creation being rejected by the server because the request content cannot be decoded. The `Upload-Complete` header in the response is set to true since the server is uninterested in receiving the full representation after the decoding failure, and the upload is complete in its perspective. The client cannot continue the upload.
```
